Concept : Recognizing Archived and Compressed Files
Description : Archiving and compression tools in Linux such as tar, star, ar, gzip, bzip2, xz, rar, 
              arj, and 7zip. Archive files group multiple files into one, and compression reduces file size.
Purpose : To save storage space, organize multiple files, and prepare data for backup or transfer.
Linux commands :
tar : Archive files (with optional compression)
star : Faster tar with ACL and long filename support
ar : Deprecated archiver, still used in development
gzip, gunzip : Compress and decompress files
bzip2, bunzip2, xz : Alternative compression utilities
Additional Info : Archive ≠ compression. Archives can exist without compression, but most often they are combined.

Concept : gzip and gunzip Commands
Description : Demonstrates compressing files with gzip and decompressing them with gunzip. 
              File extensions automatically change to .gz. Supports compressing single or multiple files using wildcards.
Purpose : To reduce file size and restore files when needed.
Linux commands :
gzip filename : Compress file
gzip *.sh : Compress multiple files
gunzip filename.gz : Decompress file
Additional Info : Original files are replaced by compressed versions; .gz must be decompressed before direct use.

Concept : bzip2 and bunzip2 Commands
Description : Compresses and decompresses files with .bz2 extension. Supports verbose (-v) mode and compression levels (-9). 
              bunzip2 is an alternative decompression tool.
Purpose : Provides stronger compression than gzip, often at the cost of speed.
Linux commands :
bzip2 * : Compress all files in directory
bzip2 -d * : Decompress all
bzip2 -v -9 *.sh : Verbose, maximum compression
bunzip2 *.bz2 : Decompress .bz2 files
Additional Info : Better compression ratio than gzip; widely used for source code and large text files.

Concept : tar Command
Description : Archives multiple files into a single .tar or .tar.gz file. Supports compression (-z), listing (-t), 
              and extraction (-x). Preserves metadata such as permissions and ownership.
Purpose : To create backups and easily move collections of files.
Linux commands :
tar -cvf file.tar /dir : Create archive
tar -cvzf file.tar.gz /dir : Create compressed archive
tar -tvf file.tar : List archive contents
tar -zxvf file.tar.gz : Extract compressed archive
Additional Info : The order of flags does not matter except -f must come before filename.

Concept : star Command
Description : Extended version of tar, faster with advanced features. Archives files into .star format. 
              Retains metadata such as permissions and ownership.
Purpose : Provides a modern, efficient alternative to tar with added capabilities.
Linux commands :
star -c -v -f=/Backup/file.star *.sh : Create archive
star -t -v -f=/Backup/file.star : List contents
star -x -f=file.star : Extract archive
Additional Info : May need to be installed separately on some systems.

Concept : tar with Compression (gzip)
Description : Shows difference between plain tar and compressed tar (.tar.gz). 
              Compression is added using -z option. Extraction uses -xvzf.
Purpose : To combine archiving and compression in a single step for efficiency.
Linux commands :
tar -cvf file.tar /dir : Archive only
tar -cvzf file.tar.gz /dir : Archive + compress
tar -xvzf file.tar.gz : Extract compressed archive
Additional Info : .tar.gz is commonly used for distributing software packages and backups.

Concept : zip and unzip Commands
Description : Creates .zip archives (with recursion -r) and extracts them using unzip. Allows deleting specific files from archive with zip -d. Works in both CLI and GUI environments.
Purpose : Popular, cross-platform compression format; widely used for sharing and distributing files.
Linux commands :
zip -r /Backup/Budgets.zip Budgets : Create recursive archive
unzip -l Budgets.zip : List contents
zip -d Budgets.zip 2011 : Delete files from archive
unzip Budgets.zip : Extract archive
Additional Info : Integrated with desktop Archive Manager for GUI handling.

Concept : Bash Script with tar and gzip
Description : Creates a simple script that archives and compresses a file, sets executable permissions, locates it with find, executes it, and runs it in background with &.
Purpose : Automates backup tasks using scripts.
Linux commands :
echo "hello" > datafile : Create file with content
vi datafile : Edit file with vi
tar -czf /Backup/data.tar.gz datafile : Archive + compress in script
chmod +x script.sh : Make script executable
find . -name "script.sh" : Locate script
./script.sh & : Run script in background
Additional Info : Demonstrates combining file manipulation, archiving, compression, and automation in shell scripting.
