
Troubleshooting Memory Issues:

The amount of memory or RAM in your Linux system determines how many processes can run concurrently. When we run out of memory, 
the oldest used memory pages are swapped out to disk to a swap file. The swap partition makes space for the new memory that is required.
However, the problem with disk access, when it come to us needing access to direct memory, disk is many thousands of times slower 
to access memory directly than RAM. Thankfully, We have a number of commands that we can use in Linux to see how much memory we have
and also we can see how that memory is being used.

Here we can check the memory file then see some memory statistics:
cat /pro/meminfo | more              
 
We can check how much memory we have in total, how much is used, and how much is free, which applies to physical memory, 
electronic memory, RAM, swap partition, and swap memory through a swap file:
free  -g                                                                

Poorly managed processes can also cause memory issue. We can use top command to view all processes.
While using: top : press the letter F, which will take us into the fields screen. Scroll down and highlight %MEM.
Then press the letter S to set it as the sort column:
top                            

We should also take into account when we bootup the system, what services are set to start at boot time. Why? Because the more 
processes we have set to start on boot up, the more memory will be consumed. 
Let check enabled unit and see if we need them all at boot time:
systemctl list-unit-files | more | grep enable                                                                         

Finally, sometimes we have a problem with physical memory chips themselves. 
Let do a memory diagnostic test. First, we need to download our Linux OS ISO file and drag and drop that file
into an installer USB. Next while USB installer with ISO Linux files is plugged in, rebooted the Linux system 
Boot into USB installer and scroll down to highlight the Troubleshooting boot menu option.
And from there, run a memory test. The memory diagnostic test will check the RAM for errors or defects.

